Why do we need self balancing binary search trees We
have learn that in the worst case searching a value
in the linked list is order of n because they
don't follow any ordering rules for an alternative
We have used the binary search trees since the binary
search tree follows left right ordering rules
We can search an element in order of Log n time
complexity
But what will be the time complexity if we insert
sorted numbers in a binary search tree like 10 20 30
40 50 60
In this case the binary search tree will look something
like this
Here All the nodes are inserted only on the right
side of the Binary search tree and in structure looks
as same as the linked list
So if we want to search the elements 60 it
will take order of n time and not log n
time
So even if we use the binary search tree
in the worst case the time complexity to search
an element is order of n so
What is the solution to this problem We need to
write a self adjusting logic on top of binary search
tree implementation which automatically balances the height of the tree
whenever insertion and deletion happens
If we can do that we can always keep the
BST size as minimum as possible so that even in
the worst case we can retrieve elements in order of
log n time complexity
These kinds of binary search trees are called self balancing
binary search trees
A self balancing binary search tree is a hike
balance binary search tree that automatically keep the height as
small as possible
Then insertion and deletion operations are performed on the tree
So even in the worst case we can retrieve elements
in order of log n time
These are the two widely
use self balance binary search trees a V L tree and
red black tree we will learn how to construct AVL
tree and red black tree in the coming lessons.